
## Step 5: What does REST and SDN have to do with any of this stuff?

### Software Defined Networks (SDN) and Representational State Transfer (REST)

Recall earlier that we mentioned that Network Engineers define the interfaces of network devices by typing the information via a Command Line Interface (CLI).  Doing this work is quite time consuming and error prone.

What if we told you that this information could be added or modified dynamically via a software application? That is what [Sofware Defined Networks (SDN)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software-defined_networking) is about!

With the introduction of SDN new features and protocols were introduced to network devices such as switches and routers so that third party applications could dynamically configure them and make decisions of how to process the data.  How does this work?

On a network device data enters and leaves via what is called a Data Plane.  The decisions of what to do with the data is made by what is called a Control Plane.  Before SDN these two planes were tied together essentially as one.  SDN separated these into two separate planes so that network configuration and decisions could be completed via the Control Plane which could be remote.

The simplest way to add these SDN features was to create Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) to provide to the software developer so that he/she could use them to dynamically configure switches and routers.

The new APIs were based upon a new web based protocol called [Representational State Transfer (REST)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer) which is designed to simplify function calls. If you're not familiar with REST please checkout the [Coding 101 Rest Basics Learning Lab](/#/lab/coding-101-rest-basics-ga/step/1) .

Since the implmentation of SDN, Cisco and several other companies have created new technologies such as SDN Controllers that provide API functionality for developers to dynamically configure and change the network. A few of these controllers are [APIC-EM](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em/) and [COSC](https://developer.cisco.com/site/openSDN/).  To learn more about these SDN Controllers and their functionality checkout the DevNet Learning Labs specific to each.

### Stuff to Think About
1. What network configuration would you want to automate via SDN?

2. What features of REST make it simple to use?

*Congratulations!  You have completed Networking-101 Basics!
