
# IPv4 Addresses and subnets

This lab provides an overview of IPv4 addresses, binary numbers and subnetting.

## Objective

* Learn about IPv4 addresses.
* Understand how to use binary numbers.
* Learning about subnets, hosts, and using subnetting.

This lesson focuses on wired networks. Wireless networks have other network components that are not covered here.

## Prerequisites

* You have some general knowledge about networks and have completed the Networking 101 and 102 Learning Labs.
* Familiarity with IPv4 protocol, also known as Internet Protocol version 4.

## Additional Information

* Online networking tutorials: [Cisco Learning Network Store](https://learningnetworkstore.cisco.com/) and [Cisco Learning Network](https://learningnetwork.cisco.com/welcome).
* Videos: [Cisco DevNet YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/ciscodevnetchannel/).
* Books: [Cisco Press](http://www.ciscopress.com/).

## Step 1. IPv4 Addresses

### Why are IP addresses important?
Every device on a network has a unique IP address. An IP address and a MAC address are used for access and communication across all network devices. Without IP addresses there would be no Internet.

### What are IPv4 Addresses?
IPv4 stands for Internet Protocol version 4. It is a core protocol used for Internet communication that was introduced in 1983. Despite the introduction of IPv6, IPv4 continues to route most of the Internet traffic today. For more information, see [IPv4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPv4).

An IPv4 address is composed of four *octets*. Each decimal value is separated by a dot, so it's sometimes known as *dotted decimal notation*. Each octet is made up of eight *bits*, and each bit can be a value of 1 or 0.

**192.168.48.64**

| **Value**        | 192      | 168      | 48       | 64       |
|------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| **Octal/binary** | 11000000 | 10101000 | 00110000 | 01000000 |

**65.1.36.254**

| **Value**        | 65       | 1        | 36       | 254      |
|------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| **Octal/binary** | 01000001 | 00000001 | 00100100 | 11111110 |

These tables break down  individual IP addresses into their four parts. Each value is represented by eight bits. Each bit is represented by a 1 or 0. Note that there are always eight of them in each octet, and that there are always four octets in an IPv4 address.

Each group of 8 bits forms a *byte*. An IP address is always 4 bytes long or 32 bits (8 bits times 4 = 32 bits).

## Quiz
1. How many octets are there in an IP address?
2. How many bits are in an octet?
3. What are the possible values of a bit?
4. Can you name at least three network devices that you use either directly or indirectly?

<details>
<summary>Answers</summary>
<ol>
<li>4</li>
<li>8</li>
<li>3. 1 and 0</li>
<li>4. Laptop, mobile phone, headset</li>
</ol>
</details>

**Next Step:**  Binary numbers
